---
theme: post
date: 12-01-2021
title: "debian: i3, xrandr, alsa"
---

# I3 tiling manager 

 Back in March 2020 I was always struggling with keeping my desktop windows in
 order, especially with ZOOM calls, web browsers open, and working at the same
 time, I would quite often find myself in a pickle when it came to where each
 thing was on my screen. Funny enough I found myself replicating manually what
 i3 does, and that is always tiling my windows, and always having them full
 screen, or splitting on sepparate desktops.

 After working like this for a long time, I stumbled upon `bspwmn`. And I worked
 on configuring it for a couple days, ended up reinstalling Ubuntu, and then
 managed to get it to work. I can't remember the deatails, but it was not very
 straight forward - for sure. In the end, it might have been one of those things
 that if I stuck to it, maybe ... but anyhow. I used it for a while, and the had
 to configure something else on it and I kind-of abbandoned it - there's only so
 much time one wants to spend on cofiguring their window manager. And then maybe
 1 month later, I stumbled on i3.

 Easy to install, easy to configure, and we were on our way! Loved its
 simplicity and out of the box nature. So here I am today using it - might I
 say, very vanilla.

## i3 cheatsheet

These are put down as I remember them - so they are probably in some sort of
importance order. 

- `M` or `meta` in this case means the windows key - you can have it configured
  for whatever you want, but read my short story about having it set to ALT - I
  have warned you

- `M-enter` - opens a new terminal in the current environment - I use it, a lot

- `M-d` - lets you type a program you would like to open - saves me from opening
  them from the terminal - I use it, a lot

- (or `M-left` `M-right` `M-up` `M-down`) - switches between windows

- (or `M-Shift-left` ... ) - moves your window around

- `M-1` ... moves to that specific screen or desktop

- `M-Shift-1` ... `M-Shift-9` moves focused window to that specific desktop or screen

- `M-e` - toggles tiled view

- `M-s` - toggles stacked view - preffer it over the tabbed view with `M-w`

- `M-f` - toggles full screen mode - probably make the least use of it, as I
  dislike the fact that it is not as fast to swap between windows - prefer using
  `M-w` 

- [for the full shebang](https://i3wm.org/docs/refcard.html)

That's about all you would have to use, the rest -- you can kind-of make do
without.

## Configurations

- if you have a windows key, I recommend using it as the special key, back in
  March I was using an old IBM model F keyboard which didn't have it and I got
  used to having the special comands with alt. It was not an issue at the time
  as in VIM I make very little use of the alt key. But now that I use emacs and
  other software that make use of the alt, (like weechat), it is a bit annoying
  to transition to the windows key - so if you are starting out, I recommend you
  start out with that as your special key.

- using Tmux for the terminal is still my main choice when it comes to terminal
  management and multiplexing. I think using both is the sweet spot, and in my
  opinion they are complementary.

- On my thinkpad the brightness keys don't work when I use i3 - and I cannot
  find the time or mental resources to try and fix it ... but one thing I have
  learnt from it is making full use of xrandr - I will make note of how I use
  xrandr here as well, as I think it needs to come with using i3 

---

## Xrandr

Tell you what, Xrandr is pretty nifty, and it will get you out of a lot of
troubles with config'ing your display - definitely have a play arond. Here's
what I tend to use it for

- `xrandr --output <tab away to get the one> --brightness 0.5` this will set
  your brightness for each display - make note, it is a software solution, so
  you can push it over 1 and under 0 with negative numbers

- `xrandr --output eDP --left-of DP-2` - sets the placement of your monitor in
  relation to another monitor

- `xrand --verbose | less ` - gets the info you need to you without much faf -
  pipe it into a less, to save you the hustle of - you know - scrolling

---

## ALSA

Having gone through the above, let's have a look at a last thing that you
mighthave to adjust, now that you have ditched the (apparent) confort of the
gnu.

- `alsamixer` in debian you can make use of this awesome manager - it's all you
  think it is

---

That's about it for this one. If you want to have a look at configs or
.dotfiles, you can always have a look at my git. I try keeping them as up to
date as possible.