---
theme: post
date: 18-12-2020
title: "emacs: i know, right?"
---

# Introduction

I know right, I use VIM, but why is emacs now appearing here? Well I am glad
you ask: In the past week (since handing in all of my course work) I have been
obsessively learning, using, and enjoying common lisp (to which I shall refer
from now on as lisp.

I did make it run on my old set up using vim, and a plugging called (Vlime).
But reading about lisp, and wanting to be true to the typical lisp programmer I
chose to try (yet again) and get good at vanilla emacs. So here we are. It has
been weird to begin with, but in a nice way, and now after using it for all my
REPL and lisp work, it has become quite nice and cosy. I am quite far being as
fast and comfortable in it as I am in VIM for the time being, but that comes
with time. So here's a list of stuff I tend to use. 

### General note

    - `C` means control
    - `C-x` means hold control x
    - `M-x` means hold meta (alt) x
    - `M-x a` means hold meta (alt) x, release, press a

## Buffer management

I tend to use my buffers in the same way I do in VIM, minimal opened on the
screen

   - `C-x 1` is the equivalnet of `C-w o` for vim - focus on the current buffer
   - `C-x 2` is split buffer horizontally
   - `C-x 3` is split buffer vertically
   - `C-x 0` is close the current buffer   

## File management

   - `C-x C-s` save current buffer
   -

## Repl commands

I use Slime for my REPL work and these are the commands that i tend to use

- Things used while editing
  - `C-c C-c` compile the function I am currently on
  - `C-c C-k` copile the entire file
  - `C-c Tab` give suggestion

- Things used in the SLIME repl
  - `C-c M-o` clean the entire buffer of slime

## Movement keys

This is where i struggled the most to get used to (and the most different from
vim's)

- `C-a` equivalent of `^` move to beginning of line
- `M-m` move to first non white-space character of the line
- `C-e` end of line
- `C-f` forward 1 character
- `M-f` forwards 1 word
- `C-b` backwards 1 character
- `M-b` backwards 1 word
- `C-s` regex search for a word - `C-s` to move to next match
- `C-r` same as `C-s` but searches in reverse
- `M->` move to end of buffer
- `M-<` move to beginning of buffer
- `M-g g 4` go to line 4

## Killing and Kill Ring

Foolish terminology if you ask me. I'll just use the normal vim language of
deleting and yanking

- `C-w` delete region and place in the kill register
- `M-w` copy region into the kill register
- `C-y` yank
- `M-y` cycle through kill register after yanking
- `M-d` delete word
- `C-k` delete line

---

## Using emacs as a server

1. Start the server 

   `M-x server-start`

2. Send files to be edited to the server with `emacsclient`
