---
theme:  post
date:   13-05-2021
title: "NIX: 2 Simple derivations"
---

# NIX

### Experience 

I've been using NixOS and I quite like it (a lot). When I installed
it, I got rid of my Debian installation and jumped head forwards with
a full wipe out and clean install - despite reading around about the
hard installation process. To be honest, it wasn't that bad, and I
managed to install everything in two attempts with around 1 hour of
tweaking in the liveBoot version - but the documentation was nice and
clear and easy to follow.

To begin with, it took a while to get used to it, but stuck to it in
the end and I quite like it. So I thought that it might be worth
sharing a few steps and insights into making a simple standard
derivation.

### Why NixOS

If you like declarative environments, and reproducible builds, then
NixOS is for you. You can work, configure, build, run programs in
completely different environments and it is as easy as writing a `nix`
derivation.


## A tale of two derivations

*What are we looking to do?*

It's important that we stick to the basics - let's make two simple nix
derivations. The first one will produce a folder with a `greeter.sh`
that says "Hello World!"  and the second derivation will compose the
first one and just produce an executable script that says "Hi,
WORLD!".

## From \null To NIX - A bit about the NIX language

#### NIX Functions 

`NIX` the package manager uses its own lazy, pure, functional language
to build derivations called `NIX` - and as you would expect
**functions** play a major role in both `NIX` the language and `NIX`
the package manager.

*I recommend you try these out in a `nix repl` instance. So let's have
a look:*

```nix
f = x : x * 2

f 2 # -> 4
```

As you can see, all the functions are actual annonymous functions that
can be bound to a variable. To have multiple arguments to a function
we need to *curry* it:

```nix
f = x : y : x * y

f 2 3 # -> 6
```

#### Functions that take sets

A handy feature of `NIX` is the way it can manipulate and work with
sets. For example:

We right sets like this:
```nix
{ a = 1;
  b = 2;
  c = "Text"; }
```

Note the use of `;` to distinguish between elements of the set. So a
function that works on a set would look like this:

```nix
f = s : s.a * s.b

f { a=2 ; b=3; } # -> 6
```

And with a named set:

```nix
b = { a = 3; b = 4; c = 5; }

f b # -> 12
```

Note that you can even explicitly grab these arguments from the set on
the left hand side of the expression like so: (careful with the fact
that when you destructure it on the right hand side it uses `,`
*always gets me*)

```nix
f = {a, b} : a * b
```

Furthermore, `NIX` allows you to pass default arguments to your set
defined functions: (also note that even if the set has only one
element you still need to put the `;` - *also gets me every time*).

```nix
f = { a ? 1 , b ? 2 } : a * b

f {}         # -> 2
f { a = 2; } # -> 4
```

###### Set Union

By the way, you can merge sets using the infix operator `//`. As the
union of two overlapping elements the right hand side is maintained.

```nix
{a = 1;} // {b = 2;} # -> { a = 1 ; b = 2; }
{a = 1;} // {a = 2;} # -> { a = 2 ; }
```

###### List Concatenation

List concatenation is your usual suspect. `++`

```nix
[ 1 2 ] ++ [ 3 4 ] 
```

##### Unexpected attributes

A thing to note is that there is a difference in declaring the
variables of the set on the left or just declaring the set and
destructuring on the right. The differe is that when it is on the left
the function will not like it if you send it a set different to what
it expects.

```nix
f = { a ? 1 , b ? 2 } : a * b
g = s : s.a * s.b

f { a = 1; b = 2; c = 3;} # -> will not work! because it has a c 
g { a = 1; b = 2; c = 3;} # -> will work
```

To allow for more flexible sets in your function you need to add `...`
to its expected arguments 

```nix
f = { a ? 1 , b ? 2, ... } : a * b

f { a = 1; b = 2; c = 3;} # -> 2 all good
```

Also note that this way of writing it has the advantage of being able
to give the arguments default values. So all in all, pick your weapon
wisely.

**Note:** *If you are like me and like static typing check out
[dhall](https://github.com/dhall-lang/dhall-haskell/tree/master/dhall-nix)
is. I haven't had the chance to use it much, but plan on doing so
soon.*

### Lazy is good 

Bein Lazy, means that every `NIX` file is essentially a set of
expressions! So you can use `import` to import one file into another,
and `NIX` will essentially import the other file as a set - that's
awesome. So for example:

File `a.nix`:
```nix
2
```

File `b.nix`:
```nix
{ b = 3; }
```

File `f.nix`:
```nix
s1 : s2 : s1 * s2.b
```

We can the open back up our `nix repl` and do the following:

```nix
a = import ./a.nix
b = import ./b.nix
f = import ./f.nix
f a b   # -> 6
```

*That's great if you ask me.*

### With Let In

`Let` and `in` allows us to intorduce terms on the go, while `with`
allows us to avoid writing a lot.

The use of `with` makes a lot of sense when you realise that nested
expressions always have the `dot notation` - and it can become
tiresome. With gets rid of that by making all of the variables (while
avoiding clashses) of a term available to the other term. For example:

Instead of:

```nix
let                         
  context = { a = 1; b = 2; };
in
  context.a + context.b
```

We can write:

```nix
let                         
  context = { a = 1; b = 2; };
in
  with context; a + b
```

### Inherit 

Inherit allows you to bring into the local scope, variables from
outside the scope. It sounds more complicated than it is but here's an
example:

```nix
a = 2
b = 3
c = { inherit a b; c = 4; }

c # -> { a = 2; b = 3; c = 4; } swoosh!
```

### Rec

Rec turns a set into a set where self referencing is possible. It's
handy as you can write out a sequence of lets and just grab one of
them:

```nix
rec {
  a = 1032 - b;
  b = 3213 - c;
  c = 222;
  }.a # -> -1959 which is the value of a
```

### NIX Types

Although not statically typed, `NIX` is strongly typed. So the basic
types in `NIX` are:

|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| **Type** | **Example**                | **Details**                |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Strings  | `''Foooo''`                | `''` or `"`                |
|          | `"Bar"`                    |                            |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Integer  | `4`                        |                            |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Floats   | `2.2`                      |                            |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Path     | `./`                       | Relative paths get to be   |
|          | `./.`                      | expanded to absolute paths |
|          | `<nxpkgs/lib>`             | `<nxpkgs>` - goes to your  |
|          |                            | `NIX_PATH`                 |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| URI      | https://cstml.github.io/   |                            |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Boolean  | `true`,`false`             |                            |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Null     | `null`                     |                            |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Lists    | [1 2 3 "Bro mixing type" ] | Spaces, not commas         |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Set      | { key = value; }           | Don't forget the `;`       |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
| Function | x : x + 1                  | Awesome with curry         |
|----------|----------------------------|----------------------------|

### Nix built ins

Nix has LOADS of builtin functions, which I'm not going to go through,
but which you can easily discover by going into the `nix repl`, typing
`builtins.` and hitting `Tab`. If you are a `HaskellHead` or any sort
of `functional fan` you will see a lot of the usual suspects in there.

To learn what a function does, I sometimes do this thing where I type
the function and evaluate it without an argument and then it will give
some indication of what it is expecting. *Somehow, I still haven't
found a great condensed easy to search resource for all the nix
functions, but this works great - REPLS are fantastic*.

Example 
```nix
builtins.derivation 1  # error: value is an integer 
                       # while a set was expected, at (string):1:1 - oh! Okay
                       
builtins.derivation {} # error: required attribute 'name' missing, - ah, I see

# ... - you catch my drift 
```

But even cooler nix gives us `builtins.derive.attrNames` which gives
us all the expceted attributes of a Set:

```nix
builtins.attrNames (builtins.derivation {})
# ->  [ "all" "drvAttrs" "drvPath" "out" "outPath" "outputName" "type" ]
```

#### Further reading 

- [link](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nix_Expression_Language)

----

## The first derivation 

Ok, so it is very important to get to grips with the language (to a
good level) first I would say! Because afterwards you will se how nice
and neat working with NIX is.

### What is a derivation

A derivation is a `NIX` pkg manager defined set (if you would
like). Every NIX derivation set must contain the following keys:

1. `name` - the name of the derivation,
2. `system` - the filesystem in which it can be built, 
3. `builder` - the binary program that builds the derivation

Upon receiving a derivation, nix knows what to do with it. In essence
it evaluates it and does some funky stuff with hashes, so that way you
always get to save stuff in the right place. (*I quite like
cryptography and hashes and am unsure what the collision resistance of
the hashing algorithm really is, but I haven't heard of any collisions
yet*)

Let's create our greeter derivation

#### Derivation 1

`greeter.nix`:
```nix
{
  pkgs    ? import <nixpkgs>{},
  message ? "Hello World!",
  sayHi   ? '' echo '\n ${message} \n' \ >> $out '', 
  ...
} : builtins.derivation({
  name    = "greeter";
  system  = builtins.currentSystem;
  builder = "${pkgs.bash}/bin/bash";
  args    = [ "-c" sayHi ];
})
```

Ok so what is the derivation actually? Well it is as we have seen from
the tutorial above a function that takes in a **set** and returns the
result of a derivation. In this case our function takes as parameters
`message` and `sayHi`. As previously discussed we use the `builitns`
functions to get the our current system and the builder is the
`nixpkgs.bash` - it doesn't get any more basic than this really. To
`bash` we send first the argument `-c` which means execute the next
arguments as commands, and then we send it an the `sayHi` script from
the argument `Set`. If you look at the function you can see that we
are outputing to an environment variable specifically `$out`. This is
where `NIX` the package manager will save and store the output of our
build. After running `nix-build greeter.nix` you should have a
`result` symlink in your current folder that if you run `cat` on you
will see our message. Great!


#### Derivation 2

As we said from the beginning, we want **derivation two** to build
upon `greeter` and essentially do the same thing but with a different
message. This is where `NIX`'s elegance comes into play.

`greeter2.nix`
```nix
let
  g = import ./greeter.nix {};
in
{ pkgs    ? import <nixpkgs>{},
  greeter ? import ./greeter.nix{
    message = "New Message";
  },
}:builtins.derivation({
  name    = "greeter2";
  builder = greeter.builder;
  system  = greeter.system;
  args    = greeter.args;
})
```

Ok, so in `greeter2` we are essentially reimporting `greeter1` and
inheriting everything from it while just changing the message. But you
might say this is not necessarily the point! We already have a
function, that does this, why do we need to build another one?! Can't
we just change the argument we are sending to the function in the
first place? And the answer to that is yes! - *great spot*


#### Derivation 3


`greeter3.nix`
```nix
{
  g = import ./greeter.nix { message = "Something else"; };
}
```

And that's it! We've parametrised the build. 


## Conclusion

I realise this is a long post, and i might break it down. But
hopefully it has been helpful and it gives you a place to start in the
world of `NIX`. I highly recommend it.


## Further reading 

- [nixOS wiki](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/)
